---
title: How to Deploy a .co.za Website to Netlify (GatsbyJS + GitLab + RegisterDomainSA)
date: '2019-10-13'
author: "Ayabonga Qwabi"
excerpt: A step-by-step guide to hosting a custom .co.za domain with Netlify, using a GatsbyJS site, GitLab, and RegisterDomainSA DNS setup.
image: "https://images.pexels.com/photos/14553713/pexels-photo-14553713.jpeg?cs=srgb&dl=pexels-bibekghosh-14553713.jpg&fm=jpg"
---

In the past few months I have been playing around with Netlify and RegisterDomain.co.za building a couple of websites for some friends. With the latest one being www.bakeni.co.za.

I fell in love with how Netlify makes the process of hosting custom websites so easy. That motivated me to write this article, in hope that others might find it compelling to follow this deployment style.

So here's a step guide to how you can deploy your first .co.za website to Netlify.

Please note this tutorial assumes you have a stable internet connection.

## Create a GatsbyJS website

Follow the tutorial here to install GatsbyJS on your machine and bootstrap your first website.

You will need to have a running NodeJS environment. If you don't have one then you can either follow the process explained here, or you can install a Node Version Manager which can make the process easier (e.g. `nvm` or `nvm-windows`).

## Create a GitLab Repo

We could accomplish the same with a GitHub repo, but the reason I selected GitLab is for its integrated CI/CD. You can run your pipelines, build images, create custom runners and so much more all from GitLab.

Register or Login at gitlab.com

Create a new project

Follow the instructions and push your GatsbyJS website to GitLab

You will need to have Git installed and also be familiar with how it works.

## Deploy to Netlify

You will now need to login at www.netlify.com with your GitLab account.

Create a new website by navigating to https://app.netlify.com/start and select GitLab from the list of options.

Then select your GatsbyJS Website from the list of repositories.

Netlify will assign a random name to your website for which you can access your website from in the following format:

https://myrandomsitename.netlify.com

Don't worry you can always change this random name by clicking site settings.

## Purchase RegisterDomainSA domain

Search and buy a custom domain for around +-R75 p/a.

Swap RegisterDomainSA's nameservers to Netlify's nameservers.

You can do this by going to the Domains setting in your Register Domain tab. You can see this dashboard by clicking the Netlify icon at the top or navigating to:

https://app.netlify.com/teams/[your gitlab username]/dns

Then click "Add or register domain".

Then input your domain name e.g netlify-is-da-bomb.co.za

You should now be asked whether you are the owner of the domain or not.

If you are then click "Yes, add domain".

Then continue to checkout and buy your domain.

## Configure Netlify to use your custom domain

Now we want to be able to view the content of our website which is hosted at `myrandomsitename.netlify.com` on our custom domain e.g. `netlify-is-da-bomb.co.za`.

Navigate to:
https://app.netlify.com/sites/[myrandomsitename]/settings/domain

or just simply go to your site's settings and click on "Domain Management".

Under Custom Domain, click "Add Custom Domain".

Once you start the process of purchasing the domain on RegisterDomainSA's website, it registers as taken on Netlify, so you are safe to say yes even though you have not yet purchased it (unless RegisterDomainSA tells you it's unavailable).

After clicking "Continue" you should now see a list of Name Servers to use (dns1.p07.nsone.net, dns2.p07.nsone.net, dns3.p07.nsone.net, dns4.p07.nsone.net).

You can then go back to the Register Domain tab and input them in, replacing the ones already filled in by RegisterDomain.

## Recap

- Create GatsbyJS site
- Push it to GitLab
- Deploy it to Netlify
- Buy a domain from RegisterDomainSA
- Swap RegisterDomainSA's nameservers for Netlify's nameservers
- Add your custom domain to your Netlify Website

Netlify offers a whole range of other services you can take advantage of (SSL, staging subdomains, subdomains, Netlify CMS, etc.).

The End :)

Here's a code potato.

